---
layout:     post
title:      The fat boy advantage
date:       2017-03-27 23:06:00
summary:    My trip to Hunan for Chinese New Year.
categories: health
---
It’s taken me over a decade to understand my body. I used to hate it. It gained fat easily, too easily. Most would point to my ability to consume vast quantities of food like a human black hole. Also, I eat quickly. Doesn’t feel fast for me nor do I try to finish before everyone but I at any given table I am and could easily finish two plates twice the size of the first plate most are only halfway through.

My journey starts in primary school. I have a distinct memory of a friend when as part of a class exercise of describing each other simply described me as fat. It was true, across nearly 100 schoolchildren in my grade I, three other boys, and two girls who were noticeably larger than our peers. Kids are cruel and family. My younger brother leapt at the chance to poke at an obvious weakness and my parents were clear that they wouldn’t have a fat son. The sentence is harsh because that’s how I remember it but I will emphasise I have a loving family. But anyone who pretends being fat doesn’t carry stigma and difficulties has never been fat.

What could I have been differently? Examining pictures of my past I was no different from peers in the beginning until age 10 then as if someone turned on a switch I expanded. Loose fitting clothing. Belly button indentations in photographs. The true fat stage lasted just over a year. Puberty kicked in early and coupled with a significant increases in physical activity I lost enough to lose the label.

When I entered the 94.7, a 100km bicycle race, I was too young to enter reaching the minimum age of 12 less than a month before the race start. For me to lose weight I was riding and training to ride 100km. My father, 60 at the time, later told me he didn’t expect me to finish and was impressed when we did. My time, just over 4 hours. I have friends who attempting the same race as grown adults took over an hour longer. I remember hopping on the scale not for the first time but noting it for it for the first time. 64kg.

An early puberty start gave me an advantage, I entered high school about 72kg, and was almost automatically selected for my first ever A team sport. Rowing allowed me to ascend from previous record of B team selections. Anyone who has attempted a rowing machine at the gym knows they’re tough, and yet after five years of high school training I still wasn’t the trim athlete I imagined and dreamed of being. At this point I just thought I still needed to do more. No one would have described me as fat but that isn’t how fat works. Along with another crew mate we were “heavier set” than the others. Why? We were training as hard. Could we really be eating so much more that along all this time we were able to maintain the excess flab?

The advice to the overweight is the same; eat less, move more. And yet we all know slim people who are certifiable couch potatoes consuming living on an unobserved diet packed with enough sugar they would bleed syrup. They readily point out that the secret is eating less like they do and advise watching what you eat.

This is what I understood. So I picked up activity. Now at university and still in pursuit of great abs I started to run. I ran because I was bad at it and figured I would gain serious bang for buck. Fit from rowing my base wasn’t nonexistent but it was still tough. Running with a friend, an accomplished runner who was happy to run most of the way with me made me love running. Something felt wonderfully natural about. And it was easy to organise. Shoes and shorts. Seasoned runners wear old poor quality shirts freely give in with race entries. That bedraggled middle aged man over there probably has more mileage  than the car that drove you to the group start point. Unlike cycling where the cost of entry is high, running with new equipment only advertises your newness. It probably helps that the best bond distance runners in the world typically Africans. Why haven’t we cracked cycling yet?

But this is not about running. Or the many half marathons I started doing for fun on weekends. Or swimming, and then the triathlons that felt a natural fit. Fitter than your average, no doubt but still not trim. The advice was still eat less move more. Insanity.

One of many faults of the English language is ambiguity in how we phrase concepts relating to diet. When we say we want to “lose weight” I bet most people mean to lose body fat. Body weight is medically relevant for many purposes but I’m yet to hear someone say they want to weigh the same as another instead opting for the more revealing wish of wanting to have the body of an athlete or look as good as an actor. I know this desire well.

Tim Ferriss, famous for being an n=1 self experimenter and distilling complex ideas into simpler ready to go ones. His book the Four Hour Body, hot on the heels of his first bestseller Four Hour Work Week, detailed his look in a few topics but namely of interest to me fat loss. It was the first time I really framed it as fat loss. My first problem might’ve been thinking of it as losing weight.

Ferriss introduced his slow carb diet. Five rules that formed a guideline on what to eat. His rules even recommended a cheat day; once a week on Saturday eat all you want as a much as you like. I read about his process and accepted his advice. I lost weight and some body fat! Progress, finally. And I didn’t have to eat less or exercise more.

I can’t explain the significance of this change enough. I had been scrambling along the desert floor in pitch black darkness but had now been guided to the base of the mountain range. Still dark, still lost, but with a gradient from which to judge whether I was moving forward. The key, the paradigm shift, was hidden in what I ate.

In some ways the diet was still hard to follow. My cheat day was sometimes more than one day. Pizza and beer still the order of the day when meeting with friends. I did improve but my adherence could certainly have been higher. I also felt though that my progress wasn’t as fast as could’ve been. Ferriss also increased my appreciation for the science of what we ate and also imbued me with a courage to challenge the established doctrine. In time, I found a torch to help find and evaluate figurative mountains to climb seeking dietary enlightenment.

In the final months of completing my engineering degree my father was diagnosed with cancer. Less than six months later he had passed away. The prognosis was bleak from the start but he chose to undergo an aggressive treatment. I’ll never know which worsened his condition the most, the various radiation treatments and medication I religiously monitored his consumption of  or the disease destroying him from within. He lost a painful to see amount of weight. A handful of months before diagnosis he was a bubbly chubby newly minted septuagenarian but little more than skin and bones before the end.

As a family we could do little to fight the mystery within. But the weight loss was stark and we wanted to fight that. Equipped with my armchair understanding of nutrition we worked sugars and fats into into what he ate. Eating for him was a challenge. His body turned off his appetite, made food taste like cardboard and difficult to eat. So he subsisted half on what we managed to get down and half on Ensure strawberry flavoured milkshakes, themselves quite sugary.

Cancer is a monster. A multi headed beast that you don’t necessarily beat or lose to as much as you cannot triumph or be defeated by a coin toss.  There are many approaches and I do believe the medical community is doing admirable work here but there are so many factors. The type of cancer, how advanced it is, your age, your health level, and so on. A common factor though is lifestyle and in particular what we eat. Both are being given much attention but I think there are still many pillars of thought that need to be questioned. Let me not forget about diabetes, Alzheimers and other diseases that are related to what we consume.

I researched furiously online when my father was ill and haven’t stopped since. It’s only natural to question and reflect on what could’ve been done differently and among many things, I found myself thinking about diet. Did the high sugar diet he consumed beforehand contribute? My father had particular love for ice cream. What of the sugars we fed him to try help gain weight, did that make matters worse?

My paternal grandfather also suffered from cancer although he did not die from it. My maternal grandfather is overweight and has diabetes. My maternal grandmother died from a brain stem stroke and was overweight in her senior years too. Maybe I’m genetically predisposed?

My mother has certainly been trying to lose weight for decades. Skinny in her youth, very active for most of her life she too is now gaining weight in the way I imagined my grandmother, also slim in her youth, may have done as well. In addition to figuring out my weight loss, after my father’s death I had a specific interest in longevity and weather the decisions I was making ,or not making enough of now, would come back to haunt and doom me later.

Another Tim, this time in the form of Prof. Noakes, a famous doctor and professor of medicine from Cape Town. His name, already familiar to me as the author of the Lore of Running, otherwise known as the runner’s bible, announced that he was wrong about carbohydrate and fats. The fats we have demonised and avoided our actually our friends and the carbohydrates we consume wholesale are the true villains. Trying to feel less than helpless in world out of my control I wanted to help my mother with her weight and hoping she’d listen to Dr Noakes, we attended a public lecture together.

Noakes explained his discoveries of discoveries from decades ago made by other researchers that were seemingly lost or ignored for years. In a nutshell, you might be insulin resistant in which case you need to reduce your carbohydrate intake to change your body’s insulin sensitivity and increase your fat intake. All food we eat falls into three macronutrient categories of carbohydrate, fat, and protein. Alcohol is essentially a fourth we’ll leave out for now for simplicity’s sake. We can draw energy from all three but primarily we do through carbohydrate first and then fat. When we consume carbohydrates our body releases insulin which turns some of that carbohydrate into body fat to be stored for later. In insulin resistant individuals our bodies supply too much insulin turning making more body fat than in necessary whilst simultaneously depriving us of energy. An insulin sensitive person will use the carbohydrate for energy reserving a small amount for fat storage. Consuming fat doesn’t spike the insulin and we also use it and our body fat for fuel.

Note the problem with English language. The fat we eat does not automatically end up as fat on our bodies. The carbohydrates instructed by insulin does through lipogenesis. You may thinking so what? It means that the fat people you know might not be fat because they eat too much food, but rather they need to eat so much food to meet their energy needs. In other words fat people are fat because of what kind of foods they eat not how much they eat. I would like to recommend a further correction as well, when talking about carbohydrate just call it sugar and keep in mind that sugar is bad. Impossible to avoid, reducing sugar consistently for at least a month without faltering will make a real difference to your waistline.

Doesn’t that feel consistent with life? Fat people are constantly hungry despite eating so much. Thin people struggle to gain fat despite constantly eating and often eat poorly at that.

What this ultimately meant for me was that I needed to reduce my carbohydrate significantly and eat more fats. Furthermore I needed to do it consistently for a few weeks to give my body a chance to adapt to a change in fuel. I did and it worked. Incredibly well. Not eating bread, rice, pasta, and so on is very tough so it took a while to iron out a practical approach. In the end I lost over 10kg over a few months without going on a single run.

Finally I was in the captain’s chair. I had a rough grasp of what caused me to gain body fat and with some tweaks I was able to shed body fat. I also felt more energised, not having energy slumps like before in the middle of every morning and every afternoon after every meal which should come as no surprise. I soon found I naturally didn’t feel a need for breakfast feeling a desire to start eating later in the morning and again only later in the evening. All consistent with what Dr Noakes spoke about. I looked better and felt better.

Soon I found out about intermittent fasting. Although it can be helpful to lose weight the main effect and the reason it is worthwhile is longevity. Still unproven, with results primarily from lab rats, I’ll simply say it’s suspected that regular fasting could have profound effects on later life diseases as well making us fitter and healthier, even smarter, along the way.

It took me a years to gain a real practical understanding of what Noakes spoke about and the wealth of knowledge I found on online. Eating in a world that is built around sugar consumption is very challenging. I eventually stopped eating pizza, breads, and all manner of sugar loaded foods but couldn’t avoid tea and biscuits at work and dinner with my friends swept by the vegetarianism wave that is notably generally carb rich.

Fast forward to China. I’m studying Mandarin for year at Tsinghua University in Beijing. Most students live on campus and there are many canteens. One in particular serves an all you can eat buffet for a great price. It here that I’ve finally understood something about my body.

A brief review. I eat food fast. Hardly fast for me, I can certainly eat much much faster but fast for everyone else. I also think my body processes food more slowly than other people. I don’t know the feeling of being “hangry,” angry as a result of being hungry, and you’ll never find me scrambling for a small snack in the middle of the night. I also gain body fat fast. A week, even a bad weekend,  of bad eating shows almost instantly but unfortunately doesn’t disappear nearly as readily. Of course my appetite and fast eating means I do more damage in a short sitting that most. Entire pizzas no matter the size pose no real obstacle. Large servings of ice cream? I use a smaller spoon as a necessary handicap.

It took a few tries to ignore the carb rich and tasty treats at the buffet but eventually I was able to focus on proteins and fats through eating vegetables and meats. Northern style Chinese food tends to be oily much to the distaste of peers is instead for me an absolute delight. At the risk of sounding like I have an eating disorder I’ll emphasis that I have no schedule and if I feel like eating I eat. Eating almost daily at the buffet I soon found I wasn’t hungry until the next day. And when not eating with company I as often do on weekends, I could enter the canteen at 11:00 am and leave by 11:10am having eaten all I need for the next day. One a meal a day.

With no effort I’ve settled into this pattern. An easy daily intermittent fast able to consume what I need in the time it takes some to do two mouthfuls. Energy wise I feel great going the day with ease, focus wise I’m more present. Body fat wise I’ve long been at a my goal weight whilst in China as I’ve found Chinese cuisine to agree with me wonderfully. Although I do skip the staple carb rich foods which is easy to do in China as dishes are all served separately. But as I’ve listened to my body and this new norm I find I’m trimming ever so slowly just a bit and for the first time in my life realising the body I had long thought forever out of reach.

Here is my advantage. This body of mine is a gift. Efficient consumption of food if done right. And the easy weight gain? Easily a gift as well. My mistakes are obvious and I experience them soon enough to link causes. Some might have to eat poorly for a lifetime to fall victim to consequences late in life but I’ll know the next day. My indicators are better. I eat fast and able am able to fast with ease. What I’m doing may not be supported or proven but neither are the myths many believe about the food they eat and how they eat it. The best we can do is read, listen to our bodes, and titrate to our own needs. Everyone is different and I encourage to find out what works for you and write about it. What I know though is that for the first time I’ll be going to shop for a smaller pair of pants.
