---
layout:     post
title:      You're doing it wrong
date:       2018-09-29 03:07:5
summary:    Should everything be so hard?
categories: thoughts
---

A favorite teacher of mine from high school once told our science class that we should always prepare for our tests. That if we cover all the content, understanding the concepts and how to apply, and still fail then that's actually ok. But to not cover it all, which is how most of us operated at the time, was unacceptable because we'd already placed a limit on how well we could ever hope to perform. 

The concept and his words really stuck with me. In the moment and forever since. Preparation is paramount and if you're aren't willing to prepare properly then why do whatever it is that you're doing? It is a kind of mise en place for life. Just as the French cooking method instructs, before one cooks a meal they measure out and prepare everything. French cuisine can be complex requiring many tools and ingredients, to mise en place might be the only way to get through making something even seemingly simply like a mousse au chocolat than requires multiple acts of wizardry. 

Years after that very teacher spoke to me and my classmates I found myself working as a science teacher next to him. I thought I'd share how impactful his words were and are on me. He didn't remember saying them at all. Dismissing them as something he made up on the spot just to get a bunch of teenage boys to take their studying more seriously. Isn't it funny how an offhand statement can alter the very way someone thinks about their life and the way they approach living?

Far from a South African high school science classroom and on an masters exchange program at an Italian university another side statement has landed like an atomic bomb. In a course on video game design the professor shared a short video clip from the GDC, game developers conference, about some meta guidelines for game development. It is titled (You're doing it wrong)[